Chapter 9

THE GUARDIAN OF THE THRESHOLD

Important experiences when rising into higher worlds are encounters with the "Guardian of the Threshold". There is not just one, but essentially two, a "smaller" and a "larger" "Guardian of the Threshold". The first is encountered when the connecting threads between will, thinking, and feeling within the finer bodies (the astral and etheric bodies) begin to dissolve, as characterized in the previous chapter. The "larger Guardian of the Threshold" confronts the human being when the dissolution of connections also extends to the physical parts of the body (primarily initially the brain).

The "smaller Guardian of the Threshold" is an independent being. This is not present for the human being before the corresponding developmental stage is reached by him. Only some of its most essential characteristics can be noted here.

First, an attempt shall be made to represent the encounter of the esoteric student with the Guardian of the Threshold in narrative form. Only through this encounter does the student become aware that thinking, feeling, and willing have become detached from their implanted connection.

"A truly terrible, ghostly being stands before the student. He needs all presence of mind and complete trust in the security of his path of knowledge, which he could have sufficiently acquired during his previous secret discipleship. The 'Guardian' reveals his meaning approximately in the following words: 'Powers that were previously invisible to you have ruled over you. They ensured that in your previous life cycles, each of your good deeds received its reward and each of your evil actions had its dire consequences. Through their influence, your character was built from your life experiences and your thoughts. They caused your destiny. They determined the measure of pleasure and pain that was allotted to you in one of your incarnations according to your behavior in previous incarnations. They ruled over you in the form of the all-encompassing law of karma. These powers will now release part of their reins from you. And some of the work they have done on you, you must now do yourself. - Many a heavy stroke of fate has befallen you so far. You did not know why? It was the consequence of a harmful deed in one of your preceding life cycles. You found happiness and joy and accepted them. These too were the effect of earlier deeds. You have many beautiful sides in your character, many ugly spots. You have caused both yourself through preceding experiences and thoughts. Until now, you did not know the latter; only the effects were apparent to you. But they, the karmic powers, saw all your former life deeds, your most hidden thoughts and feelings. And they have determined accordingly how you are now and how you now live.'"

